we can now speak to ARA Damon who's the
founder of inara that's a nonprofit
organization that focuses on on helping
children who need life saving or life
altering medical treatment in war Tor
Nations she's joining us from Istanbul
thanks for your time with us on Al jazer
so you know November 20th is World
children's day and it comes this year
amid Israel's war on Gaza the statistics
are that one out of every 200 children
in Gaza has been killed by Israeli
attacks in the past six weeks why are we
see
such a high number of children being
killed and wounded in this war do you
think well a part of it is just because
of the sheer density of the population
that exists there and it is a very very
young population that is also very well
known and part of it is because well
despite the fact that this convention is
meant to be protecting children's rights
we're seeing them being violated on a
daily basis and not just on a daily
basis but frequently uh every single
time per day because children are not
being protected because children are
being denied the right to Food Water
Sanitation and health care you know that
that clip that you aired there earlier
with that little boy talking about what
he wanted to do I think that's what
makes it so difficult for those of us
who are involved in these organizations
that are specifically focusing uh on
trying to get treatment to children
because we do know that while of course
we don't have the capacity to change
what has happened to these children we
do have the cap capacity and the
expertise to allow them to restore and
regain hope the big problem right now of
course is that we are unable to access
razza we're unable to access those
children who need the services that we
can provide yeah so as you're saying
there are of course the short-term needs
of children as well as their families
can you just elaborate on how big those
needs are right now and what can be done
to meet
them well I mean first of all when it
comes to the needs
this is unprecedented look I'm I'm also
a journalist I've been in war zones for
the last 20 years I have never seen
anything like this of this scale of this
magnitude and neither has pretty much
anyone else who works either within the
journalism or the humanitarian space we
had for six weeks one of our founding
board members Dr Hassan abua on the
ground in Gazza during all of this and
he has come across thousands of injured
children and when we say an injured
child we're not just talking a simple
injury we're talking very complex uh
injuries that happen in this kind of of
landscape we're talking about children
who have uh Burns multiple fractures who
have dust and and debris caused by blast
that is just embedded into their flesh
who are not being able to get these
wounds properly uh cleaned out and then
you have the children who are receiving
medical treatment as well as it can be
provided on the ground who are going to
need multiple surgeries over the course
of years and this is what people need to
realize is that when the dust finally
does settle at some point in time
because it will that is when the real
work is going to begin in terms of
trying to restore these children's
ability to not just function uh but also
their ability to regain agency over
their own life and by that I mean is
that's just it for forgive me but I
wanted to ask you about in fact about
the long-term impact of this war on
children on sort of the mental and
psychological impact that it has on
them look we we've seen this in in other
War zones in the past we've seen what
happens when a child does not receive a
medical treatment and that child is
effectively relegated to a life in the
shadows the same goes for a child who
does not receive the kind of mental
health support that they need to be able
to process this in inexplicable trauma
these kinds of injuries the injuries
that emerge from this kind of a battle
Zone when we're talking about the
medical side of it we're often talking
about very complicated injuries we're
talking about treatment that needs to
last and be planned for over the course
of years these are not kids that we're
going to be able to put in for a one-off
surgery they're going to need multiple
surgeries and as they grow they're going
to need additional surgeries as well the
mental health impact of all of this is
is something that is perhaps to a
certain degree not not focused on uh
sufficiently enough because those scars
are quite potentially even more
difficult to overcome than the medical
ones because what is happening to these
children is just so irrational so severe
that if it is not properly addressed if
that trauma the fear the pain if a child
is not given an Avenue to be able to
process that it calcifies inside them
and it hinders them it prevents them
from actually being able to see a life
beyond the trauma it hinders their
ability to as I was saying regain agency
over their own life and realize that
they can and should and deserve to have
something more than what their past and
their present is currently being defined
by and this also is not something that
can be resolved with you know one
activity or one session this is years
and years of work and so what is needed
right now is for everyone to recognize
that we all need to be ready to make
years long investment in the children of
Gaza and and just to look at this sort
of The Wider context for a moment
because I know that you wrote a piece uh
and you said in it that you covered the
battle against Isis in mosul and gaza's
challenges will make it look like
Child's Play what do you mean by that
and what are the major differences that
here there's quite a b bit of of
differences
because mul is not Gaza and and Isis is
not
Hamas to a certain degree what we're
seeing right now in Gazza has by far
eclipsed anything that we've seen in
mosul look mul's death toll at the end
of it and Isis was literally holding
families hostage at gunpoint in
buildings as the US Le Coalition and the
Iraqis were dropping bombs on top of
them that death toll was around 9 to
11,000 and that is a battle that lasted
for 18 months Gaza has surpassed that
and we're in week six another big
difference also between both of those
battlefields is The Siege mul was not
besieged ever in the way that Gazza has
been besieged when civilians were able
to get out of the battle space they were
able to access humanitarian assistance
and at no point in time were things like
Electric electricity water food cut off
from them entirely what we have in Gazza
right now is war being waged on multiple
fronts you have the war that's being
waged in the complete and total Siege of
Gaza you have the war that's being waged
and the Very deliberate attempt to
prevent humanitarian aid from Crossing
to people in need that is causing vast
amounts of unnecessary suffering uh and
death and then you have one very big
reality and that at no point in time can
someone in Gazza actually escape the
Battle Zone and that completely changes
the dynamic when it comes to how the
military chooses to move forward and
chooses to carry out its actual Ground
Battle right and I believe very strongly
that there is big mistake and trying to
attempt to simplify the situation by
comparing Gaza and mul to each other and
without access to Gaza uh for
organizations like yours as well as
other humanitarian
organizations how concerning and
worrying is
that it's absolutely terrifying because
you don't know what to plan for and so
what you end up doing and this isn't
just us this is everybody who is trying
to respond to Gazza you end up trying to
set up plans for option A B C D there
are trucks and trucks and trucks of
humanitarian Aid waiting the aid is
there this is not an issue of trying to
get everybody together to try to get the
aid in place the aid is in place it just
can't get across the border there are
field hospitals that are ready to be set
up but there is no decision on where
those field hospitals can actually be
set up there's structures and systems
that we're all busy trying to build up
in terms of how do we get an injured
child out of Gazza into a medical
facility that can actually treat them
only we can't access that child and we
don't know at what stage we are actually
going to be able to access this child so
you end up trying to plan for multiple
scenarios or for a combination of what
one of those scenarios might actually be
and I have to say it is absolutely
gutting because I have spoken to and and
seen videos of multiple children who
have gone through horrific injuries who
whose legs have been amputated and
they're asking their parents how am I
going to do all of these things how am I
going to go to school how am I going to
spend time with with my friends how am I
even going to go to the bathroom on on
my own and I know that at inata we have
the capacity to be able to help them and
say actually you are going to be able to
do all of these things it's not going to
be the same as it was before but we can
give you the capacity to do all of this
only we can't say that to this child or
the parent right now because we don't
even know when we're going to be able to
get in and if at that point in time that
we are able to get in if that child
still going to be alive all right uh
we'll have to leave it there AR Damon
thank you so much for speaking to us
from
Istanbul